this text file will be a partial devlog


2023 03 25
added art drawn by Eric Garcia to replace original art
  rename Crown, Church, Ship, Canon, Knight, Soldier, Pyramid to match names in original to minimize chance of breaking game.
  resize Crown to match saucer dimensions 48px x 21px
  resize Pyramid to match barricade dimensions 42px x 32px
  resize BowArrow to match spaceship dimensions 26px x 16px

To do:
  add to alien class two more aliens, alien4 and alien5
    config.py, ALIEN_FORMATION and ALIEN_SPRITE_NAMES
    alien.py, beginning line 198 with the creation of the list of aliens
  add to spaceship class a sprite for missile, if possible
    config.py
    spaceship.py, beginning at line 65
  add events for a gamepad or joystick if possible
    spaceship.py, beginning at line 138

from Eric:
    Is it too much to set up a hierarchy?
    Crown (saucer)
    Church (alien5)
    Ship  (alien4)
    Canon (alien3)
    Knight (alien2)
    Soldier (alien1)

Done:
add to alien class two more aliens, alien4 and alien5
  config.py, ALIEN_FORMATION and ALIEN_SPRITE_NAMES
  alien.py, beginning line 198 with the creation of the list of aliens

created a branch called fullscreen on GitHub that has correct syntax for FULLSCREEN in main.py line 19. This will require the creation of a KEYUP event to quit the game, or force an unplugging of the Raspberry Pi. I'm not integrating this branch to master yet.

====
2023 03 26
downloaded a pygame script to test gamepads to Raspberry Pi. It was updated for pygame v.2 but appears backward compatible.

Tested USB NES gamepad and it worked.
Tested USB Trooper2 Atari style gamepad and it worked.
this shows a pathway to adding gamepad events to code. I don't know how much time it will take.

====
2023 03 27
new unit test: created a branch on GitHub called scaled; added argument to main.py line 19 "pygame.SCALED"; tested on Raspberry Pi; did not work, we are using pygame v. 1.9 and the SCALED entity is introduced i pygame v.2

verified version of python installed : 3.9.2
verified version of pyinstaller installed : 5.9.0

====
2023 03 29
new unit test, no new branch yet. On a second Raspberry Pi I tried adding key events to the event handler in alien.py. I tested a sys.quit() and a toggle_fullscreen directive. Both worked, but not perfectly -- or, not as expected. Will have to try again.

I also was able to launch the unedited PySpaceInvaders from within Geany on that Raspberry Pi. The OS and model is identical to the show machine.

Today I also received the package with the Raspberry Pi 4 from Vilros which had been ordered by Eric. I will need to test the software on it.

====
2023 03 30
I assembled the package from Vilros. For the record here is the link:
https://vilros.com/products/vilros-raspberry-pi-4-basic-starter-kit-with-fan-cooled-heavy-duty-aluminum-alloy-case?variant=39568353689694

Contents: Raspberry Pi 4B with 4GB RAM, Grey Aluminum passive cooled case, power supply w/ on-off switch, hdmi mini to hdmi adapter, neoprene bag.

I am providing a SanDisk Extreme Pro 32GB microSD card with Raspbery Pi OS installed. I've taken it from what has been the development machine to date. It contains a copy of the game.

Vilros also offers a pre-assembled kit which includes a microSD:
https://vilros.com/products/vilros-raspberry-pi-4-pre-assembled-complete-starter-kit?variant=39707014922334

I've tested the RasPi 4 with the microSD and it works. This is necessary because this disk has a 32-bit version of the "Bullseye" OS.

I've also tested it with another microSD card (same OS) that I used for yesterday's unit tests and it worked. The toggle_fullscreen worked as it should. It displayed the game, centered on the screen, fullscreen, when toggled on. Yesterday I only saw a black screen. I could toggle back and forth using the F12 key event that I had programmed into an unbranched copy of PySpaceInvaders.

I didn't try the sys.quit. I've learned there exists better syntax, that is to say, one more line of code to insert before the sys.quit directive.

I'm curious to see if I can learn to make a joystick work.

Today I learned that the Aztecs called the Spaniards COYOTL because they were tricksters who stole by night.

I added branch for RESIZABLE with toggle_fullscreen. This may be the branch to merge with the main one (named master). (F12 key toggles)

I added code to enable quitting with the ESCAPE key.

I've added a branch called joystick to begin exploring if joystick events can be added without breaking the code. No luck so far with my first attempt.

====
2023 04 04
I took the weekend off for my birthday.
Yesterday I had dinner with Eric who is in town to give a lecture.

Today I merged the RESIZABLE branch into the master file.
I also added KEYDOWN event for the ESCAPE key.
I downloaded the new version and tested it.

the fullscreen toggle doesn't work with the screen orientation rotated to right at any resolution. I have tested with 1080p, 720p, and 480x640.

the fullscreen toggle works well and scales the game with normal orientation and resolutions up to 1080p. I cannot test a higher one.

I will add ESCAPE key event to branch named fullscreen and test that branch.

Fullscreen does not work with screen rotated at any resolution. I will merge the fullscreen branch. It doesn't make any sense to keep the toggle. I will comment that out.

====
2023 04 13
I gave the hardware loaded with the version denominated 0.0.5 to Eric on the 5th. The next day I tagged and named that version on gitHub as a release. This was my first time issuing a release.

I also put my Raspbery Pi 3B+ back into service with another microSD card loaded with the same Raspberry Pi OS version. I downloaded the 0.0.5 version of the game to that device and put it play in the studio to see how long it could run without crashing.

It ran for 24-36 hours non-stop. I decided to play to win. I accumulated a large number of extra lives. I accumulated so many that I crashed the game. It did not crash the OS, and so the Terminal was still open. I noted the error message, which was an out-of-bounds error in attempting to render a pygame or python surface, presumably attempting to locate a copy of the bow and arrow sprite outside the bounds of game's surface width and height dimensions. I don't know if I can learn to fix this so it won't crash in the future. I advised Eric about this. It has run unplayed without crashing for almost a week since. I want to learn how to log an issue report on gitHub so I can mark it for future investigation. I thought I knew how to do this.

The high score is only recorded while the program is running. It does not read nor write it to a file. There is no way to have a historic high score recorded. I don't know if this would qualify as an issue.

I need to create a PDF document for Eric and the gallery with instructions for installation. I added a HowToLaunch.txt file to this repository and left a copy on the desktop of the computer I gave to Eric. A pdf would include photos as well as text.

====
2023 04 21
My son productively broke the game. When the invaders overrun the player, but the player can dodge them, then the game continues without a "game over". My son is clever and figured out how to fix this. We created a new branch to implement the changes.

====
end of file
